Studios sessions (#433)
seqeralabs/docs: platform_versioned_docs/version-24.2/data_studios/index.mdx

- **starting**: The Studio is initializing.
- **running**: When a Studio is **running**, you can connect to it, copy the URL, or stop it. In addition, it can continue to process requests/run computations in the absence of an ongoing connection.
- **stopping**: The recently-running Studio is in the process of being stopped.
- **stopped**: When a session is stopped, the associated compute resources are deallocated. You can start or delete the Studio when it's in this state.
- **errored**: This state most often indicates that there has been an error starting the Studio but it is in a **stopped** state. There might be errors reported by the Studio itself but these will be overwritten with a **running** status if the session is still running.

  :::tip
  If you encounter an error with the public preview release of Studios, [contact Seqera support][contact].
  :::

## Collaboration

By default a Studio is collaborative. All workspace members can connect to a running session with the exception of those with only the **View** role. If a session is configured to run in private mode, only the user who created the Studio can connect to it.

## Session management

> You can set a session lifespan for a Studio. Upon expiration, a snapshot is taken and then the session is automatically shutdown. A session can be extended multiple times before it is shut down. When a change to session lifespan is made, it applies only to newly-started sessions. Running sessions are not effected by changes to the session lifespan.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can set a session lifespan for a Studio. Upon expiration, a snapshot is taken and then the session is automatically shutdown. A session can be extended multiple times before it is shut down. When a change to session lifespan is made, it applies only to newly-started sessions. Running sessions are not affected by changes to the session lifespan.
```

> You can set a session lifespan for a Studio. Upon expiration, a snapshot is taken and then the session is automatically shutdown. A session can be extended multiple times before it is shut down. When a change to session lifespan is made, it applies only to newly-started sessions. Running sessions are not affected by changes to the session lifespan.

Reviewer 2: suggestion: here there is a bit of ambiguity since a session can be extended multiple times (this is change to lifespan effectively), while changes to sessions lifespan (at workspace level) do not affect running studios.
Maybe some rewording can help make it clearer, something like:
```
You can set a session lifespan for a Studio. Upon expiration, a snapshot is taken and then the session is automatically shutdown. Before expiring a session's lifespan can be extended multiple times before it is shut down.

Workspace level settings to studio lifespan are only applied to newly started studio sessions, studios which are already running will have the originially set lifespan applied to them.
```

- **starting**: The Studio session is initializing.
- **running**: When a Studio session is **running**, you can connect to it, copy the URL, or stop it. In addition, it can continue to process requests/run computations in the absence of an ongoing connection.
- **stopping**: The Studio session is in the process of being stopped.
- **stopped**: When a Studio session is stopped, the associated compute resources are deallocated. You can start or delete the session when it's in this state.
- **errored**: This state most often indicates that there has been an error starting the Studio session but it is in a **stopped** state. There might be errors reported by the session itself but these will be overwritten with a **running** status if the session is still running.

## Collaboration

By default a Studios session is collaborative. All workspace members can connect to a running session with the exception of those with only the **View** role. If a session is configured to run in private mode, only the user who created the session can connect to it.

:::tip
RStudio sessions do not currently support user collaboration.
:::

## Session management

> You can set a lifespan for a Studio session. Upon expiration, a snapshot is taken and then the session is automatically shutdown. A session can be extended multiple times before it is shut down. When a change to session lifespan is made, it applies only to newly-started sessions. Running sessions are not affected by changes to the session lifespan.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can set a session lifespan for a Studio. Upon expiration, a snapshot is taken and the session is automatically shut down. Prior to expiry, a session's lifespan can be extended multiple times before it is shut down.

Workspace-level settings to studio lifespan are only applied to newly started studio sessions. Studios that are already running will have the lifespan that was originally set applied to them.
```

When starting a Studio session, a *checkpoint* is automatically created. A checkpoint saves all changes made to the root filesystem and stores it in the attached compute environment's pipeline work directory in the `.studios/checkpoints` folder with a unique name. The current checkpoint is updated every five minutes during a session.

When you stop and start a Studio, or start a new Studio from a previously created checkpoint, changes such as installed software packages and configuration files are restored and made available in the Studio. Changes made to mounted data are not included in a checkpoint.

Checkpoints can be renamed and the name has to be unique per Studio. Spaces in checkpoint names are converted to underscores automatically.

> Checkpoint files in the compute environment work directory may be shared by multiple Studios. Each checkpoint file is cleaned up asynchronously after the Studio that referenced the checkpoint is deleted.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Checkpoint files in the compute environment work directory may be shared by multiple Studio sessions. Each checkpoint file is cleaned up asynchronously after the session that referenced the checkpoint is deleted.
```

If the maximum allocation size is reached, it is possible to reclaim storage space using a snapshot. 

> Stop the active Studio to trigger a snapshot from the active volume. The snapshot is uploaded to cloud storage with Fusion. When you start from the newly-saved snapshot, all previous data is loaded and the newly-started Studio will have 2 GB of available space.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Stop the active Studios session to trigger a snapshot from the active volume. The snapshot is uploaded to cloud storage with Fusion. When you start from the newly-saved snapshot, all previous data is loaded and the newly-started Studios session will have 2 GB of available space.
```
